---
layout: post
title: "Jobs"
date:   2011-03-15 05:22:12
author:   shabda
categories:   jobs
---

We are a small software company building web facing applications for a
number of clients. We work with Python, Django, Jquery, Mysql or
Postgres. We **"build amazing webapps"**. You can learn more about us
from:

-   <http://agiliq.com/>
-   <http://agiliq.com/blog>
-   <https://github.com/agiliq/>.

What we are looking in you:

-   Are you a software engineer looking to work in a small team with
    smart people?
-   Do you know multiple programming languages, and have the ability to
    pick up new ones?
-   Can you prove why your IDE or editor is better than mine?
-   Do you know relational databases, when to use them, and when not to.

If your answer is yes to any of the above questions, we are looking for
you!

Additional requirements:

-   Extremely good programming skill.
-   Good knowledge of relational databases.
-   Must have helped implemented a number of web applications. If you do
    not have knowledge of \'the\' technologies we work with, that is
    fine. We will train you. Its more important that you really
    understand software development. (For example, we would prefer
    someone who knows a lot of RoR/Ruby over someone who knows a bit of
    Python/Django).

You are a perfect fit if you have many, or all of the below:

-   You are listed in CONTRIBUTORS of an open source project
-   You have a Github profile.
-   You know what Bloom filters are
-   You have built something cool because "Why not"
-   You know multiple programming languages
-   You know various SQL an NoSQL DBs. When to use them, and when not
    to.

What we offer:

-   A competitive salary
-   A great team
-   A great work environment
-   Commitment to learning new things and continuous skill enhancements.

Contact shabda (at) agiliq.com. We are looking to hire as soon as
possible.
